You can always rely on Jimmy Kimmel to poke fun at people when they've messed up royally.

On Tuesday, Kimmel tore into Jacob Wohl for his alleged involvement in an elaborate plot to smear the name of Robert Mueller, former FBI director – a spectacular case of fraud that the FBI have now been asked to investigate.

Wohl, the 20-year-old Trump supporter and former hedge funder, is perhaps best known in the Twitter-sphere for having developed his own odd tweet format, where he snitches on young "liberals" by tweeting out his observations from "hipster coffee shops" around Los Angeles.

I just a left a hipster coffee shop. It was packed with liberals, whispering amongst each other about what a commendable job President Trump did with Vladimir Putin this morning in Helsinki — America is PROUD! 🇺🇸 — Jacob Wohl (@JacobAWohl) July 16, 2018

But now, Wohl is at the centre of a much more serious hoax than that of his kind-of-hard-to-believe hipster coffee shop experiences.

Wohl is allegedly involved in an attempted plot to smear Robert Mueller – who is currently investigating Russian meddling in the 2016 U.S. election – orchestrated by Republican lobbyist Jack Burkman. The smear plot involved fake documents from a private investigations company called Surefire Intelligence, and women being offered money to make fake allegations against Mueller.

Reporting by Bellingcat and Daily Beast suggest that Surefire Intelligence is in fact a fake company set up by Wohl using fake Medium articles, fake LinkedIn profiles with stolen photos and a website, the domain of which is registered by Wohl himself, to make the claim that Mueller had sexual assault allegations made against him in the past.

A phone number on the Surefire Intelligence website was allegedly the number of Wohl's mother, an aspect that Kimmel enjoyed very much.

"I like a scandal that involves a Verizon family plan," Kimmel said. "So Jacob might be in trouble with the FBI and grounded by his mother, too."

Wohl denied his involvement to the Daily Beast, and wrote in a Tweet that the claim that he is involved with making payments to women fake allegations against Mueller is "a fake news con job."

I've counted more than 25 news outlets who have reported allegations against me, claiming that I offered to pay women to make accusations against Mueller



I've looked into this "Lorraine Parsons"! Looks like she doesn't even exist!



IT'S A FAKE NEWS CON JOB! — Jacob Wohl (@JacobAWohl) October 30, 2018

On Twitter, people started stacking the evidence against the 20-year-old Trump fan.

New Yorker reporter Jane Mayer shared a series of photos of Wohl and the alleged managing partner of Surefire Intelligence, a man named Matthew Cohen.

Odd. Jacob Wohl says he doesn't know nuttin' about Surefire Intelligence, the firm tied to the bizarre Mueller allegations. Take a look at the photos below of Mathhew Cohen, head of 'Surefire,' and of Jacob Wohl. pic.twitter.com/Q1rAW4wkPO — Jane Mayer (@JaneMayerNYer) October 30, 2018

Wonder what the hipsters at the coffee shop will be saying about this case.